---
published: true
---
# Migrating from MariaDB to MongoDB

Howdy!
<br>
<div align="justify">
In my previous post we talked about MongoDB’s growing popularity and its compatibility with other databases with regards to business intelligence and scalability. I also wrote about how documents in a collection need not be well defined or structured and demonstrated some CRUD operations using Mongo Shell through my video.</div>

> Let me take this topic further and talk about migrating from an RDBMS to NoSQL, especially MongoDB. 

<div align="justify">
Data partitioning and data replication are the major features that set NoSQL apart from conventional RDBMS. Despite these advantages, most big and medium-sized software systems currently in use are still RDBMS-based since the migration process is fraught with difficulties. The first is the amount of data that needs to be moved. Organizations typically decide to move their databases when the amount of data being stored is enormous and the RDBMS can no longer meet the demands for high availability and scalability. The way the relational database architecture avoids data redundancy, which is a feature of the NoSQL models, presents another obstacle.</div>
<br>
<div align="justify">
The original data model must remain semantically identical to the new data model in this case. Therefore, without any data loss or modification, all current relationships must be precisely recorded (Normalize). In addition to the expense of transferring all the data and models, there is also a cost associated with upgrading software’s so they can successfully connect with the new MongoDB database.  </div>
 <br>
<div align="justify">
Whether the target and source databases are of the same kind or not, migration involves moving the source database's entire contents, including its structures and data, to the target database. In my situation, switching from MariaDB to MongoDB is a difficult undertaking. The procedure of retrieving data is greatly complicated by the necessity of changing the application source code to conform to the new database. </div>
<br>
<div align="justify">
For this blog post I wanted to convert one of my Maven web applications projects that was connected to MariaDB to MongoDB and demo it to my readers. I succeeded in converting the database (converting tables to collections and maintaining some key values that had relationships with other collections) but when it came to creating models and controllers to access the data, everything went for a toss!! </div>
    
> Until you are successfully connecting to your new database and doing certain operations with it, its not considered a successful migration!! :roll_eyes:
  
  
<div align="justify">  
I was very confident about writing queries and manipulating the data but for some reason even my Netbeans debugger could not properly identify the connection issue. After umpteen number of coffees and stack overflow searches, I gave up! </div>
  <br>
  <div align="justify">
One of the main reasons to give up was also related to not having enough time on my hand. This semester has been one helluva time crusher with a zillion deliverable. I have promised myself to give this web app a go sometime in September so for now I’m going to migrate a simple SQL database to MongoDB hosted in my cluster on Atlas and write a java program to do some CRUD operations. I will use my favorite Eclipse to do the deed! </div>
 <br>
  <div align="justify">
To demonstrate this Migration process, I will use a java program we (Jenny and I) wrote during our second semester java course. Below is a quick video on how the application compiles and generates data we request from a Movie SQL database (Movies!! Now you know why I picked this application! :grin:

	

